PAA 04-25 
SUBJ/ ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDANCE ON THE PROPER COMPUTATION OF CREDITABLE 
SERVICE AND PAY ENTRY BASE DATE 
REF/A/37 U.S.C § 205// 
REF/B/DODFMR Volume 7A Chap 1// 
REF/C/MCRO 1100.1B/ 
REF/D/MCO 1560.33// 
REF/E/10 USC 12103// 
GENTEXT/REMARKS/1. This message is labeled Personnel Administrative Advisory (PAA) 04-25. All 
current PAAs are located under the reference tab of the Manpower Information System Support Activity 
(MISSA) portal. https://usmc.sharepoint-mil.us/sites/dcmra_mra_mi_missa. Request addressees 
disseminate this PAA to subordinate organizations/units as applicable.  
1. Background 
In October 2024, the Assistant Deputy Commandant for Manpower & Reserve Affairs (ADC M&RA) 
tasked the Pay Entry Base Date (PEBD) Working Group (WG) to conduct an end-to-end review of PEBD 
processes and procedures. It was determined there is a need for clear and concise guidance within the 
Marine Corps that clearly defines creditable service, standardizes the computation of PEBD, and defines 
the business rules that govern the establishment and adjustment of PEBD.  
2. Definitions 
2.a PEBD is the actual or constructive date of original entry into the Armed Forces, which is creditable for 
pay purposes calculated according to a 30-day month, for all months. 
2.b Creditable Service is determined by adding together all eligible service periods to determine a 
Marine’s PEBD. 
3. Purpose 
This advisory provides guidance to administrative personnel for the accurate establishment and 
adjustment of PEBD by defining periods of creditable service per Ref (a) and Ref (b), standardizing the 
process of PEBD computation, and applying PEBD business rules. 
4. Periods of Creditable Service    
4.a. Includes active or inactive service, in accordance with Ref (b), in any of the following:  
1. Air Force of the United States (service without specification of a component). 
2. Air National Guard. 
3. Army National Guard of the United States (ARNGUS). 
4. Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, Space Force, and Coast Guard Reserve. 
5. Army of the United States (service without specification of a component). 
6. Army Reserve National Guard (ARNG). 
7. National Guard and National Guard of the United States. 
8. Nurse Corps and Nurse Corps Reserve of the Public Health Service (PHS). 
9. PHS and Reserve Corps of the PHS. 
10. Regular service in the Army, Air Force, Navy, Coast Guard, and Marine Corps. 
4.b. Other periods of creditable service in accordance with Ref (a) and Ref (b) include: 
1. Officer, deck officer, or junior engineer service in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration.  
2. Service on a military service retired list, temporary disability retired list, or honorary retired list 
of any uniformed service or service as a member of the Fleet Reserve or Fleet Marine Corps 
Reserve. 
3. Any period of service during which a member is entitled to retired, retirement, or retainer pay 
from any uniformed service. 
4. Service as a cadet or midshipman at a military academy is always creditable service for an 
enlisted member who is not commissioned.  
5. The time that an enlisted member is retained after expiration of term of service of an Armed 
Force for medical care or hospitalization for disease or injury incident to service. 
6. Service otherwise creditable that is performed before a Marine reaches the statutory age for 
enlistment, unless the enlistment contract was voided or invalidated for fraud. 
7. Active service performed as a temporary member of the U.S Coast Guard Reserve. 
8. Service terminated by desertion or dishonorable discharge unless the enlistment was fraudulent 
and was voided for that reason. 
9. Periods of service when a member is detailed to and receiving pay and allowances from any other 
agency of the United States, even though accruing military pay, and allowances is suspended. 
10. Service as a member of the Army, Navy, or Air Force Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC), 
provided the member has concurrent Selected Reserve (drilling status) for duty performed on or 
after 1 August 1979. 
11. Service as an officer, Army field clerk, flight officer, aviation midshipman, or enlisted member of 
a uniformed service (as described in Ref (b)). 
12. Any period of service which was creditable under any federal statute in effect on 10 January 
1962. 
13. Service as an enlisted member in a Reserve Component (RC) before beginning Active Duty or 
Active-Duty Training (ADT) if the Reserve enlistment was entered before 1 January 1985, 
(including IRR service under DEP). Reference (b) contains additional restrictions that went into 
effect after 1 January 1985.  
Note 1: Constructive Service Credit would apply to certain medical and dental officers that are 
entitled to extra credit to reflect time spent in medical or dental school. However, this is not a regular 
occurrence. For further instruction see Ref (b). 
Note 2: PEBD for Marine Corps Tuition Assistance Program (MCTAP) recipients within the PLC 
program is date of commissioning unless individual was prior Drilling Reservist in which case PEBD 
would remain the same as initial entry Ref (d).  
5. Periods of Non-Creditable Service 
1. The time served in an enlistment or commission that is terminated (excluding Administrative 
Separation (ADSEP)), voided, or invalidated as fraudulent. 
2. The period of service where underlying medical conditions require medical care or hospitalization 
was due to misconduct. 
3. The time served as a commissioned officer in the Philippine Army. 
4. The period a Marine was on the Emergency Officers’ Retired List. 
5. The period an individual was a member of a state, home, or territorial guard. 
6. The time, subsequent to September 14, 1981, that a Marine serves while enrolled in the Armed 
Forces Health Professions Scholarship (AFHPSP) and Financial Assistance Programs (FAP), or 
while a Doctor of Medicine (DOM) student at the Uniformed Services University of Health 
Sciences (USUHS). Use any service creditable on the date of the officer’s entry into DOM 
USUHS to compute the officer’s basic pay for longevity purposes while a USUHS student, not to 
exceed the maximum rate of O-1 pay (Table 1-7) or O-1E pay (Table 1-8), as applicable, or the 
rate of pay of the member’s former pay grade, if greater, as outlined in reference (b) 
7. Any period of service as a commissioned officer in the ROTC after 12 October 1964 and prior to 
1 August 1979, even if the member held concurrent Reserve status. 
8. The time served in an RC before beginning active duty or an initial period of ADT for enlistment 
in an RC under 10 USC 12103 that was entered into between 1 January 1985 and 28 November 
1989. 
9. Enlisted service in an RC entered on or after 29 November 1989 and member doesn’t perform 
IDT before beginning active duty or ADT under 10 USC 12103. 
10. Enlisted service in an RC Service entered on or after 29 November 1989, under 10 USC 513 
(excluding periods of Active Duty). 
11. Time an individual was a member of the inactive National Guard. 
12. Prior to February 11, 1996, commissioned or warrant officers received full credit for service days 
regardless of absences or confinement, and enlisted members on active duty as a Reserve Officer. 
After February 11, 1996, commissioned or warrant officers may not count periods of service 
listed in Ref (b) other than computing service of basic pay. 
6. Calculating Pay Entry Base Date  
6.a. Identify the most recent date of entry to duty without a break in service to establish a “foundational” 
PEBD. Use contractual documents to validate the date a member entered active duty. (i.e. DD Form 4 and 
DD Form 1966).   
6.b. If the member has reported periods of prior service, follow Steps 1-6. 
1. Beginning Dates: List the starting date for each separate period of service (year, month, day).  
Add all the years, months, and days separately.  Though the PEBD is determined on a 30-day month, 
include the 31st day if the beginning date of a period of creditable service begins on that day. 
2. Ending Dates (with Adjustments): List the ending date for each separate period of service 
(year, month, day). Important Rule Changes: If an ending day is the 31st of any month, change it to the 
30th. If an ending day is February 28th or 29th, change it to February 30th. Add all the adjusted ending 
years, months, and days separately. 
3. Subtract: Subtract the total of the beginning dates (from step 1) from the total of the adjusted 
ending dates (from step 2). 
4. Add Back Inclusive Days: For each separate period of service (each "gap" in service), add 1 
day to the result from step 3. Why: Each period of service is at least one day long. Subtracting the start 
date from the end date can result in zero days if it's only one day of service, so adding 1 ensures that 
single day is counted. 
5. Convert to Years, Months, and Days: The result from step 4 will be in years, months, and days. 
Convert any extra months (more than 12) into years, and any extra days (more than 30) into months. 
6. Calculate Adjusted PEBD: Subtract the total creditable service (the number of years, months, 
and days calculated in step 5) from the members most recent ("foundational") PEBD. 
Example Calculation: 
Note 3: Adjusting the foundational PEBD to an earlier, or later, point in time, may result in an 
increase or decrease to the longevity pay rate to which the Marine is entitled to receive pay. 
Note 4: For any Marine with a break in service, reference source documents and compare with the 
D188 remarks located within the Marine Corps Total Force System (MCTFS) to assist in validating 
the PEBD. 
7.  Calculating Pay Entry Base Date – Decision Tree  
Note: Reference the Marine’s service contract (i.e. DD Form 214, , DD Form 4, for Enlisted or NAVMC 
763 for Officers) to determine their accession/reaccessions and appointment/reappointment pathway, 
respectively. 
7.a Enlisted Accession or Reaccessions Pathway Table 
7.b. Officer Accession or Reaccessions Pathway Table 
Note 5: Rule 2, If PLC, and yes to Marine Corps Tuition Assistance Program (MCTAP), and serving in 
the SMCR, then PEBD does not change Ref (d). For Law Officers using MCTAP reference MCRCO 
1131.1A. 
Note 6: For Reserve Officers, same rules as Active Duty Officers with adjustments based on component 
and qualifying service Ref(b). 
Note 7: For creditable service calculation of Reserve Enlisted and Reserve Officers review the Career 
Retirement Credit Record (CRCR) located within the MCTFS RT07 view.  
Note 8: Rule 4 includes commissioned with prior service, including Naval Academy Preparatory School 
(NAPS). 
8. Manpower Strategy Branch, Manpower & Reserve Affairs, has initiated coordination with all accession 
and reaccessions stakeholders to develop higher level policy that establishes PEBD authorities and 
governance, defines common PEBD related terminology, reinforces Creditable Service and PEBD 
calculations, establishes roles and responsibilities, integrates accession and reaccessions reporting units 
into Marine Corps Administrative Analysis Team (MCAAT) annual inspection cycle, and establishes 
timely and regular PEBD reviews for all Marines. 
8.a.  The authority to report and adjust PEBD is restricted to MCRC, TECOM (via the Marine Corps 
Recruit Depots), the Marine Corps Base Quantico Installation Personnel Administration Center (IPAC), 
and M&RA (Manpower Information System Support Offices (MISSO), and Manpower Management 
Separation and Retirement (MMSR)). All requests for review or correction to PEBD must be submitted 
via chain of command and endorsed by the supporting IPAC to Manpower Management Performance 
Branch 21 (MMPB-21). All requests for review or correction must include all necessary source 
documentation.  
9. The point of contact regarding this guidance is Lieutenant Colonel Jordan R. Northrup, Manpower 
Strategy Branch (MX), Manpower & Reserve Affairs (M&RA) at (703) 784-4314 or via e-mail at 
jordan.r.northrup.mil@usmc.mil. 
Michael R. Strobl 
Assistant Deputy Commandant 
Manpower & Reserve Affairs 
